docs; nix-shell script; gitignore updated (#19)
roc-streaming/rocd: docs/index.md

<!-- vim: set textwidth=110: -->

# rocd

We start from a small preview of a system as a whole to understand what is the role of `rocd` component. The
purpose of the [Roc Toolkit](https://roc-streaming.org/toolkit/docs/about_project/overview.html) (further
referred to as `roc`) is to implement real-time audio streaming over network.

## Entities

Here are the top-level components:

**host**

> :   Computer where the `roc` instance is currently running on. Computer platform may be on of:

Reviewer: "on" => "one"

    - PC (personal computer, usually a desktop device with monitor or a similar output device),
    - Android,
    - iOS (future plans),

>     - embedded (is actually the same as PC, but usually doesn't have a monitor).

Reviewer: 1. Let's list PC platforms: Linux and other *nix, macOS, Windows (future plans).
2. I'd replace "embedded" with "embedded Linux", because for now we support only that.
3. I'd relax definition here: "is actually the same as PC, but usually doesn't have a monitor" => "*can be similar* to PC, but *often* doesn't have a monitor"; because people use very different things, e.g. yocto with squashfs or RPi with display and keyboard.
4. If we distinguish "embedded" from desktop, I think we also should distinguish "server". Unlike other options, server installation wouldn't have audio devices but can be used as proxy/transcoder/nat traversal server/etc.

**rocd**
:   Server component used for stream management and auto discovery over network. Contains a library and a
    binary that wraps it in a daemon. A stand-alone library is needed for mobile versions with their specific

>     platform limitations (programming language, permission models, ...).

Reviewer: 1. Given my previous comment, maybe it's better to avoid "server" here.
2. If we're not going to ship rocd as a rust library - I think for now we don't want to do that? - then I'd present this in other way: rocd is a primarily a daemon, but on mobile it is intended to be embedded into the app via a platform-specific library. It still mostly behaves like a daemon - after initialization and passing context, you need to communicate with it via HTTP, for example. It just runs within your process.
3. "programming language, permission models, ..." - I guess this part requires more clarification as it's very unobvious. Maybe add a paragraph for it, or something like an [info block](https://squidfunk.github.io/mkdocs-material/reference/admonitions/)? We could mention that on Android, we need to: access java-specific APIs; run inside app's address space; acquire permissions via app UI and use this context for audio APIs.

Author: 1. renamed `server` -> `service`

**roc-cast**
:   Component used for two primary purposes:

>     - Provide UI for user interaction with rocd.

Reviewer: I'd say it's more than just a UI for rocd. I see rocd as a much more general-purpose thing, allowing very different use-cases. roc-cast, OTOH, implements one or a few quite specific use cases (home audio & AoIP in buildings, mostly). So I expect that roc-cast will have business logic on top of rocd specific to its use-cases.

    - On Android (and — possibly — iOS) devices it implements a wrapper application with a so-called main

>       activity context to allow interaction between non-Java libraries (C/C++/...) with mobile sound devices.

Reviewer: Don't quite get this section. Any android app has main activity. There is no wrapper app - roc-cast is regular android app; one of its jobs is to acquire permissions and pass context with granted permissions to rocd. It will use rocd via wrapping java *library*, which will be *part of rocd*.

Author: just rewrite everything related to Android by yourself please :)

**roc-toolkit**

> :   The part that provides some or all of the following components: sound device IO, pipeline, network IO. May
>     be used in binary (MVP) or library forms.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:   The core library for real-time streaming. Can be used for some or all of the following features: sound device I/O, processing pipeline, network I/O. In the MVP stage, rocd will use it via command-line tools for simplicity, later we'll switch to the C API.
```

![](./assets/dia/simple.svg)
/// caption
Simple case: `roc` implements all steps between input and output sound devices
///

<!-- TODO: add more use case examples here -->

![](./assets/dia/general.svg)
/// caption
...
///

## APIs

`roc-toolkit` may be used in [different ways](https://roc-streaming.org/toolkit/docs/api/reference.html):

![](./assets/dia/roc-toolkit-apis-1.svg)
/// caption
as a library for pipeline only (`roc_{sender,receiver}_{encoder,decoder}*`)
///

![](./assets/dia/roc-toolkit-apis-2.svg)
/// caption
as a library for pipeline and network components (`roc_{sender,receiver)*`)
///

![](./assets/dia/roc-toolkit-apis-3.svg)
/// caption
as a library for all three components (`roc_transceiver*`; not implemented)
///

All three components — `sndio`, `pipeline`, and `netio` — are configured:

| Component | via CLI args | via C API |
| ---:      | :---:        | :---:     |
| sndio     | ✅           | ❌        |
| pipeline  | ✅           | ✅        |
| netio     | ✅           | ✅        |
/// caption
///

## Implementation

`roc-cast` will provide two interfaces:
- native UI (Flutter) and
- web UI.

> The latter may be used on embedded systems

Reviewer: embedded => headless

User configures `roc` (sound devices, network, pipeline) via native `roc-cast` client (primary way) or
directly by interacting with `rocd` by HTTP API. On mobile platforms it is always `roc-cast` client. On

> embeded platforms the default way is HTTP client.

Reviewer: I think if user uses roc-cast, it should never use rocd directly (unless debugging). roc-cast will likely have its own logic on top of rocd and I don't think we should allow/support bypassing that logic.

Author: removed this

![](./assets/dia/user--rocd-interaction.svg)
/// caption
///

| Platform    | `roc-cast`: native | `roc-cast`: web (HTTP) | `rocd` API (REST) |
| ---:        | :---:              | :---:                  | :---:             |
| PC          | ✅ / ✅            | ❌ / ✅                | ❌ / ✅           |
| Android/iOS | ✅ / ✅            | ❌ / ❌                | ❌ / ✅           |
| embedded    | ❌ / ❌            | ✅ / ✅                | ❌ / ✅           |
/// caption
Default/supported clients for each platform

> ///

Reviewer: I can't understand the meaning of two emojis ("default/supported").

Also, "embedded" targets may support UI, e.g. if we call raspberry pi with a display and keyboard "embedded".

Author: cleaned out
